Author: Yazin Tantawi


    (De)compression and Bootstub documentation


Many moons ago, a smart man writing a kernel decided to implement kernel compression to save space
when loading the kernel. That man was Linus Torvalds. I've decided to further his legacy in almost
the same way.

In this text file, you will find the blood, sweat, and tears i have poured into this very endeavour
in the name of portability and compactibility.



Here are some common questions i was asked when implementing kernel compression:



1: Why implement kernel (de)compression?

A question as old as time itself. Implementing kernel compression offers a smaller boot image, 
offers faster loading into memory, takes up less bandwidth on PXE/network booting environments, 
and is overall a better way to package a kernel if you are sensitive about memory footprint,
like i am.



2: Doesn't kernel decompression slow boot?

Not by much. Modern hardware can decompress compression algorithims such as LZ4 (the one i'm using),
Zstd, and gzip in less than a millisecond if your implementation is optimized for performance.



3: Is implementing (de)compression complicated?

Somewhat. You need to figure out certain aspects in order to properly implement compression, such as
memory management, how to shove the kernel and decompressor into a single ELF file (if you want it like that),
how to make them not corrupt eachother, etc.. Point is, yes, it's complicated if you don't know what you're doing
(like me). Take the opportunity to use my code for YOUR VERY OWN kernel. I needed that the most when i was 
implementing it myself.



4: Why did you choose LZ4?

I primarily chose LZ4 for its stupidly fast decompression rates and tunability. That said, you should choose a 
compression algorithim on how fast you want your kernel to decompress, and how small you want your kernel.



Now, onto the actual inner-workings of our decompressor.

A top down explanation of how this decompressor works, the issues to fix, and a little diagram for visual learners.

Firstly, Limine loads the ckImage (ELF file, stands for "compressed kernel Image") into memory. Once Limine loads the
ckImage into memory, the decompressor starts up, gets memory access, HHDM offsets, etc.. from Limine, decompresses the kernel, 
then hands the kernel everything it needs to begin its journey.

ISSUE: Limine only hands memory access, HHDM offsets, etc.. to the first thing loaded in memory, which is in this case, 
our decompressor bootstub. This becomes a MAJOR issue if you don't setup your decompressor to hand everything to the kernel
after its done decompressing it. Cue many, many, many page faults and errors i've never dealt with in my entire OSDev journey.

The fix: Make your decompressor hand down everything it got from Limine to your kernel after it decompresses the image you handed it.
In other terms, have your decompressor bootstub copy the structs that Limine provides you into a fixed location, or pass it via 
registers/the stack before jumping to the main kernel function. 

Think of it like this: Your bootstub and your kernel are in a room. Your kernel needs a bottle of water, and your bootstub is the only
thing that can get a bottle of water. Your bootstub puts a bottle of water on the ground next to the kernel, and the kernel picks it up 
and drinks it. Now, i know that wasn't the best of analogies, but yknow, it helps nonetheless.

Here's a diagram if you're a visual learner:
Limine (hands access to mostly everything) -> Decompressor bootstub (hands access passed down from Limine) -> kernel 



Moving onto another topic, you might be asking me "Well, what does the ELF structure look like?", and to that i respond with... another diagram.

This is a very dumb'ed down version of how the ELF file is structured:

[START]
[Decompressor code, gets loaded by Limine first]
                    |
                    v
 Hands down management once the kernel is decompressed
                    |
                    v
[Compressed Kernel Image, waiting to be unpacked by the decompressor]
                    |
                    v
[A bunch of whitespace and whatnot (i haven't inspected my own ELF yet)]
                    |
                    v
[END]

You're more than welcome to inspect the ELF with a variety of your own tools. As to me? I'm too lazy. (joke)



Files related to (de)compression:

tools/lz4enc.c
boot/stub/stub.c
boot/stub/linker.ld 
kernel/utils/decompressor/lz4.c 
kernel/utils/decompressor/includes/lz4.h 

More to documentation to come.